Basic usage of the Python and C/C++ programming languages are introduced
and used to solve representative computational problems from various
science and engineering disciplines. Software design principles
including time and space complexity analysis, data structures,
object-oriented design, decomposition, encapsulation, and modularity are
emphasized. Usage of campus wide Linux compute resources: login, file
system navigation, editing files, compiling and linking, file transfer,
etc. Versioning and revision control, software build utilities, and the
LaTeX typesetting software are introduced and used to help complete
programming assignments. Prerequisite: introductory programming course
equivalent to [*CS
106A*](http://explorecourses.stanford.edu/search?view=catalog&filter-coursestatus-Active=on&page=0&q=CS106A)
or instructor consent.

Goals
=====

The goal for this course is for students to be able to apply knowledge
of the following topics to the development and usage of scientific
computing software:

Linux
-----

-   Remote login and file transfer using SSH, SCP, and SFTP

-   Filesystem navigation (moving through and creating directories,
    > finding files, etc.)

-   Creation and editing of code and data files

Python
------

-   Variables, conditionals, file I/O, data structures (lists, tuples,
    > dictionaries, sets),

-   loops, functions, exceptions, and modules

-   Objects and references

-   Objected Oriented Programming (OOP) using classes

-   Numerical Python (NumPy) and Scientific Python (SciPy) extensions
    > for scientific computing

-   matplotlib for visualization

C/C++
-----

-   Compiling and linking

-   Preprocessor

-   Containers (vector, map, etc.)

-   Object oriented programming (classes and methods, etc.)

-   Pointers, addresses, and memory management

-   *Note that more advanced features of C++ (operator overloading,
    > templates, etc.) will be covered in CME 212*

Building software
-----------------

-   Creating and using a basic Makefile

Version control
---------------

-   Use of Git and Github for managing software projects

LaTeX
-----

-   LaTeX markup (figures, tables, equations, references, etc.)

-   Managing a bibliography

-   Creating a ready to publish file in Adobe Acrobat (PDF) format

Time and location
=================

Days: Mon, Wed, Fri

Time: 3:00 PM - 4:20 PM

Location: 320-105 (Geology Corner)

Communication
=============

We will be using Piazza to send announcements and as a discussion board
for the homework projects. Please use this if you have questions
regarding course material.

[*http://www.piazza.com/stanford/fall2015/cme211*](http://www.piazza.com/stanford/fall2015/cme211)

All other correspondence should be sent to:
[*cme211-staff@lists.stanford.edu*](mailto:cme211-staff@lists.stanford.edu)

Teaching staff
==============

Instructor: Nick Henderson

Head Teaching Assistant: Josh Romero

Teaching assistants:

-   Oliver Bear Don't Walk

-   Evan Nixon

-   Loek Janssen

-   Swaroop Ramaswamy

Office hours
============

To be announced in the first week of classes and posted on Piazza.

Resources
=========

We will assign readings from the following books, which are available
online to Stanford students through the library:

-   **Learning Python**, 5th Edition by *Mark Lutz*\
    > [*http://proquest.safaribooksonline.com/book/programming/python/9781449355722*](http://proquest.safaribooksonline.com/book/programming/python/9781449355722)

-   **C++ Primer**, 5th Edition by *Lippman, Kajoie, and Moo*\
    > [*http://proquest.safaribooksonline.com/9780133053043?uicode=stanford*](http://proquest.safaribooksonline.com/9780133053043?uicode=stanford)

Other resources will be uploaded to the course page on Piazza.

Grading
=======

Your overall course grade will be based on assignments (50%), two
quizzes (12.5% each, 25% total), and a final project (25%).

Course letter grades are at the discretion of the instructor. If at any
time you have questions about your standing in the class, please contact
the instructor. Please don’t wait until after the course is over if you
have concerns about your progress in the class.

Assignments
-----------

There will be 6 graded assignments. Assignments will be posted on Friday
afternoons and be due the following Friday at 2:30 pm via online
submission. Late assignments will not be accepted.

Although students are expected to complete all assignments, the one
assignment with the lowest score (by percentage) will automatically be
dropped when computing your overall course grade. The policy of dropping
the lowest score is in lieu of a late policy or providing extensions so
please don’t ask for them.

Final Project 
==============

In place of a final exam there will be a final project due on the
scheduled day of the final exam. More details will be provided later in
the quarter.

Honor Code
==========

All students are expected to abide by the honor code:

[*http://studentaffairs.stanford.edu/judicialaffairs/policy/honor-code*](http://studentaffairs.stanford.edu/judicialaffairs/policy/honor-code)

This computer science website has a good explanation of the honor code
as it relates to courses involving significant amounts of computer
programming:

[*http://csmajor.stanford.edu/HonorCode.shtml*](http://csmajor.stanford.edu/HonorCode.shtml)

Note that at various times we may use special computer software to
assist us in detecting plagiarism:

[*http://theory.stanford.edu/\~aiken/moss/*](http://theory.stanford.edu/~aiken/moss/)

If you are having difficulty completing an assignment please contact a
TA or the instructor so that we may help you. We would much rather spend
time helping you than dealing with honor code violations.

Students with Documented Disabilities
=====================================

Students who may need an academic accommodation based on the impact of a
disability must initiate the request with the Office of Accessible
Education (OAE). Professional staff will evaluate the request with
required documentation, recommend reasonable accommodations, and prepare
an Accommodation Letter for faculty dated in the current quarter in
which the request is made. Students should contact the OAE as soon as
possible since timely notice is needed to coordinate accommodations. The
OAE is located at 563 Salvatierra Walk (Phone: 723-1066, URL:
http://studentaffairs.stanford.edu/oae).
